Editor doc improvement pass (#137)
microsoft/VSExtensibility: docs/new-extensibility-model/extension-guides/editor/editor.md

# Editor Extensions

The Visual Studio editor supports extensions that add to its capabilities. Examples include extensions that insert and modify code in an existing language.

For the initial release of the new Visual Studio extensibility model, only the following capabilities are supported:

- Listening for text views being opened and closed.
- Listening for text view (editor) state changes.
- Reading the text of the document and the caret locations.
- Performing text edits.

The Visual Studio editor generally refers to the functionality of editing text files, known as documents, of any type. Individual files may be opened for editing, and the open editor window is referred to as a TextView.

## Editor Extensibility entry points

Your extension code can be configured to run in response to various situations that a occur when a user interacts with Visual Studio. These are known as entry points. Editor extensibility currently supports three entry points: listeners, the [EditorExtensibility](#EditorExtensibility) service object, and commands.

> Listeners are events that get triggered when certain actions occur in the an editor window, known as a `TextView`. For example, when a user types something into the editor, a `TextViewChanged` event occurs. When an editor window is opened or closed, `TextViewCreated` and `TextViewClosed` events occur. Listeners are objects that can be used to set up handlers for those events that your extension can use to perform your custom actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Event listeners get triggered when certain actions occur in an editor window, represented in code by a `TextView`. For example, when a user types something into the editor, a `TextViewChanged` event occurs. When an editor window is opened or closed, `TextViewCreated` and `TextViewClosed` events occur.
```

# Editor Extensions

The Visual Studio editor supports extensions that add to its capabilities. Examples include extensions that insert and modify code in an existing language.

For the initial release of the new Visual Studio extensibility model, only the following capabilities are supported:

- Listening for text views being opened and closed.
- Listening for text view (editor) state changes.
- Reading the text of the document and the caret locations.
- Performing text edits.

The Visual Studio editor generally refers to the functionality of editing text files, known as documents, of any type. Individual files may be opened for editing, and the open editor window is referred to as a `TextView`.

> ## Editor Extensibility entry points

Reviewer: This could become a "Getting started" section once we reflow this doc to an Overview template

- [ITextViewLifetimeListener.TextViewClosedAsync()](./../../api/Microsoft.VisualStudio.Extensibility.Editor.md#M-Microsoft-VisualStudio-Extensibility-Editor-UI-ITextViewLifetimeListener-TextViewClosedAsync-Microsoft-VisualStudio-Extensibility-Editor-UI-ITextView,System-Threading-CancellationToken-) called anytime an editor is closed by the user.
- [ITextViewChangedListener.TextViewChangedAsync()](./../../api/Microsoft.VisualStudio.Extensibility.Editor.md#M-Microsoft-VisualStudio-Extensibility-Editor-UI-ITextViewChangedListener-TextViewChangedAsync-Microsoft-VisualStudio-Extensibility-Editor-UI-TextViewChangedArgs,System-Threading-CancellationToken-) called anytime a user makes a text change in the editor.

> Each of these methods are passed an [ITextViewSnapshot](./../../api/Microsoft.VisualStudio.Extensibility.Editor.md#T-Microsoft-VisualStudio-Extensibility-Editor-UI-ITextViewSnapshot) containing the state of the text editor at the time the user invoked the action and a CancellationToken that will have `IsCancellationRequested == true` when

Author: ```suggestion
Each of these methods are passed an [ITextViewSnapshot](./../../api/Microsoft.VisualStudio.Extensibility.Editor.md#T-Microsoft-VisualStudio-Extensibility-Editor-UI-ITextViewSnapshot) containing the state of the text editor at the time the user invoked the action and a CancellationToken that will have `IsCancellationRequested == true` when the IDE wishes to cancel a pending action.
```

> the IDE wishes to cancel a pending action.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Define when your extension is relevant

> Your extension is typically relevant only to certain supported document types and scenarios, and so it is important to clearly define its applicability. The Visual Studio Extensibility model provides several ways to clearly define the applicability of an extension. These are various attributes which are known as document selectors: tthe [AppliesTo attribute](#appliesto-attribute), which helps specify what file types such as code languages the extension supports, and the [AppliesToPattern attribute](#appiestopattern-attribute), which lets you refine the applicability of an extension by further matching on a pattern based on the filename or path.

Author: ```suggestion
Your extension is typically relevant only to certain supported document types and scenarios, and so it is important to clearly define its applicability. The Visual Studio Extensibility model provides several ways to clearly define the applicability of an extension. These are various attributes which are known as document selectors: the [AppliesTo attribute](#appliesto-attribute), which helps specify what file types such as code languages the extension supports, and the [AppliesToPattern attribute](#appiestopattern-attribute), which lets you refine the applicability of an extension by further matching on a pattern based on the filename or path.
```

[AppliesToPattern(Pattern="docs/*.md", RelativePath=true)]
```

The `Pattern` property represents a glob pattern that is matched on the absolute path of the document.

Glob patterns can have the following syntax:
* `*` to match zero or more characters in a path segment
* `?` to match on one character in a path segment
* `**` to match any number of path segments, including none
* `{}` to group conditions (e.g. `**​/*.{ts,js}` matches all TypeScript and JavaScript files)
* `[]` to declare a range of characters to match in a path segment (e.g., `example.[0-9]` to match on `example.0`, `example.1`, …)
* `[!...]` to negate a range of characters to match in a path segment (e.g., `example.[!0-9]` to match on `example.a`, `example.b`, but not `example.0`)

Note that a backslash (`\`) is not valid within a glob pattern. Make sure to convert any backslash to slash when creating the glob pattern.

## Access editor functionality

> You can access editor functionality within event handlers and in commands that your extension may define. See [Commands](commands.md).

Reviewer: Consider the relationship of this sentence with the three-item list above.

Your editor extension classes inherit from `ExtensionPart`. The `ExtensionPart` class exposes the [Extensibility](./../../api/Microsoft.VisualStudio.Extensibility.Framework.md#P-Microsoft-VisualStudio-Extensibility-ExtensionPart-Extensibility) property. Using this property, you can request an instance of the `EditorExtensibility` object, which exposes real-time editor functionality, such as

> performing text edits.

Reviewer: new line?

```csharp
EditorExtensibility editorService = this.Extensibility.Editor();
```

### Access editor state within a command

`ExecuteCommandAsync()` in each `Command` is passed an `IClientContext` that contains a snapshot of the state of the IDE at the time the command was invoked. You can access the active document via the `ITextViewSnapshot` interface, which you get by from the `EditorExtensibility` object by calling the asynchronous method `GetActiveTextViewAsync`:

```csharp
using ITextViewSnapshot textView = await this.Extensibility.Editor().GetActiveTextViewAsync(clientContext, cancellationToken);
```

Once you have `ITextViewSnapshot`, you can access editor state. `ITextViewSnapshot` is an immutable view of editor state at a point in time, so you'll need to use the other interfaces in the Editor object model to make edits. 

> ## Understand the Editor object model

Reviewer: Consider making this a separate article?

* `[]` to declare a range of characters to match in a path segment (e.g., `example.[0-9]` to match on `example.0`, `example.1`, …)
* `[!...]` to negate a range of characters to match in a path segment (e.g., `example.[!0-9]` to match on `example.a`, `example.b`, but not `example.0`)

Note that a backslash (`\`) is not valid within a glob pattern. Make sure to convert any backslash to slash when creating the glob pattern.

## Access editor functionality

> Editor functionality may be accessed within event handlers and in commands that your extension may define. See [Commands](commands.md).

Author: ```suggestion
You can access editor functionality within event handlers and in commands that your extension may define. See [Commands](commands.md).
```

is aware of the ITextDocument it came from and supports `GetChar()` to directly get the character at that point.

If you are familiar with legacy Visual Studio extensions, Position is almost the same as
[SnapshotPoint](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.visualstudio.text.snapshotpoint?view=visualstudiosdk-2019) and supports most of the same methods.

### Span

Represents a contiguous substring of characters within an ITextDocument. As opposed to a string created with
`string.Substring()` or `ITextDocumentSnapshot.CopyToString()`, creating a [Span](./../../api/Microsoft.VisualStudio.Extensibility.Editor.md#span-type) doesn't require any allocations or additional memory. You can later call `Span.GetText()` to realize it into a string in a deferred fashion.

If you are familiar with legacy Visual Studio extensions, Position is almost the same as
[SnapshotSpan](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.visualstudio.text.snapshotSpan?view=visualstudiosdk-2019) and supports most of the same methods.

> ## Editing and asynchronicity

Reviewer: Agreed on being too jargony

> Edits, that is, changes to a text document open in the Visual Studio editor, may arise from user interactions, threads in Visual Studio such as language services and other in-process extensions, or extensions running out-of-process such as those designed with the Editor object model discussed here.

Reviewer: No need to make the in-proc/out-of-proc extensions

Reviewer: The main idea here is that multiple entities could change the text out from under you, and as an extension author you need to be prepared to deal with that

- GetTextDocumentAsync() or MutateAsync() may fail if the user closes the document.

#### Concurrent Execution

:warning: | Editor extensions can sometimes run concurrently
:---: | :---

The initial release has a known issue that can result in concurrent execution of editor extension code. Each async method is guaranteed to be called in the correct order but continuations after the first `await` may be interleaved. If your extension relies on execution order, consider maintaining a queue of incoming requests to preserve the order, until this issue is fixed.

For more information, see [StreamJsonRpc Default Ordering and Concurrency](https://github.com/microsoft/vs-streamjsonrpc/blob/main/doc/resiliency.md#default-ordering-and-concurrency-behavior).

> ### RPC Support

Reviewer: Could this be a separate article? Is there an existing article discussing RPC contracts?

Author: I put the separate section in a new article - we can discuss.

Not sure yet about the RPC contracts.

Since the new Visual Studio extensibility model is entirely in a separate process, and communications between the extension process and the Visual Studio process occurs through a stream, all APIs have to at some

> level operate with serializable data types. Typically, extensions can ignore these implementation details;

Reviewer: End with period and remove however

however, in some scenarios, an extension may need to interface directly with RPC services acquired from
`this.Extensibility.ServiceBroker`. To facilitate interactions with RPC services, the object model exposes
`RpcContract` properties on most core types, and the following serializable RPC types:

> - VersionedTextDocumentRange - 1:1 serializable version of `Span`, accessible via `RpcContract`. This type should be used in most RPC contracts between processes.

Reviewer: accessible through the `RpcContract` property.

Reviewer: which you can access with the `RpcContract` property.
